# **Networking and Cyber Security** 

When going through my overall understanding of Networking and Cybersecurity, I felt as if I had a decent grasp of the material prior to this degree but I was greatly mistaken. After taking Dr. Jennex’s course CIDM-6340, I have become more prudent and steadfast in my approach towards Networking and Cybersecurity.  This newly acquired knowledge has helped me immensely both in my personal and professional life. When reviewing my most proficient skills and knowledge regarding Networking and Cybersecurity, I believe that understanding the usage of tools such as WireShark, NMAP, and using a fully integrated exposure management software (i.e. Nessus) all have added to my confidence and overall understanding of Networking and Cybersecurity. By leveraging the aforementioned tools, I am confident that if I were to come across various cybersecurity threats, I could remediate and eliminate most threats with a confidence.  As I worked through these various applications, I came across a plethora of difficulties that revolved mostly around Mac/Apple compatibility issues. While Mac software is relatively easy to work with, this degree has proven to be extremely difficult for me using my personal device (Macbook Pro). There are many restrictions and workarounds that I needed to complete to even run many of these applications within my root/terminal of Mac and most of it was locked down. 

While I feel confident using these tools, I believe I am still deficient when understanding various Networking and Cybersecurity topics. Some of my difficulties reside in understanding Network Protocols to interpret packet headers, decoding protocols and even recognizing abnormal behavior versus normal behavior. Essentially, creating filters and interpreting the results were a large part of the battle for me but I progressively got better when reviewing this information. As I was exposed to NMAP, I had the same deficiencies as mentioned before, interpreting results and understanding the overall scan capabilities/options and the impacts of firewalls and their restrictions. One of my greatest drawbacks and deficiencies come from WTAMU directly and not from the courses I have taken. When registering for classes in Spring of 2024 I had issues with two courses not being available during this semester: CIDM-6341 “Current Issues in Cybersecurity” and CIDM-5380 “Cloud Computing and Security”. I was extremely disappointed, and I feel that WTAMU failed me as an institution. The courses I wanted to take were only available during “Even” years and to add insult to injury the original courses I wanted were not available in 2024 (which is an even year). The “reasoning” behind this was due to staffing issues it was not available, but this was never disclosed prior to registration. WTAMU needs to get better with advising their student body, well in advance with the list of courses that will not be available during an upcoming semester. I am now taking courses that do not coincide with my professional career. I would have preferred to dive deeper into CIDM-5380 “Cloud Computing and Security” since that is my current wheelhouse within my organization. I work intimately with SaaS vendors and Cloud computing / security is the primary goal of the organization that I work for. Focusing on the current issues and future cloud computing and security technologies would have proven to be invaluable to me in my profession. 

Learning through CIDM-6340 we learned the key fundamentals of Networking Security. The most important of all in my opinion, was the business continuity plan for any networking and cybersecurity attack. While learning the fundamentals was very interesting, the most impactful was planning and putting into action the teachings from CIDM-6340. When going through the process of recovering for a cyber-attack we focused on detection tools/processes, containment and mitigation of the threat, communication to the organization, preservation of attack proof, redundancy and backup plan, recovery process/procedures, training of the organization, penetrative testing of security environment and finally continuous improvement of processes and monitoring. I consider Networking and Cybersecurity threat response as a circular diagram where some steps are sequential and others not, all the prior mentioned steps are part of the process. The final project for CIDM-6340 consisted of creating a Ransomware Recovery plan for your organization. The recovery plan consists of implementing an incident response strategy and measures to mitigate and hopefully avoid such an attack from happening in the first place. Being prepared for an attack is more than half of the actual battle. Part of the preparation consists of active testing of the network “penetration testing”, cyber-attack simulations, Disaster Response Testing and a backup/redundancy plan. While all the prior actions stated are important the very first line of defense is the training and awareness of the organization. There needs to be a training program in place to educate employees of cybersecurity best practices to avoid the multitude of bad actor ploys they may come across.  Cybersecurity is the role of the entire organization and not just Information Technology. The goal of the project is to not only devise a solid plan but also to minimize the disruption of business operations, mitigate the cyber-attack, protect customer, and employee data which in turn will protect the reputation of the organization as whole. 

The second course within the realm of Networking and Cybersecurity I took during this master’s program was CIDM-6356 Digital Forensics and Fraud Detection. While this course was interesting, it was not my first or second choice for this section of the MSCISBA program. The previously mentioned courses were not available during this last semester of my degree and were not available during prior semesters. I am currently in progress of completing CIDM-6356 and I did find various topics to be very interesting such as the usage of Stenography, Fraud Detection using Python, Simulating Data and Financial Fraud detection models (using HTML, JavaScript and SQL). Two specific assignments from this course were very interesting such as “Detecting Retail Employee Fraud” and “Digital Forensic Analysis”. The assignment “Detecting Retail Employee Fraud” focused on using SQL to create automated queries that can detect potential employee fraud. The goal was to review the policies that the company currently has in place and create SQL queries that would capture the exceptions to those policies. Once the SQL queries have been identified the work is not done. The assignment also required for me to create a executive fraud analysis that would be shared with senior management / leadership of an organization. This assignment put me in the shoes of not only the fraudsters but also senior leadership to give them exactly what they need minus the “fluff”. This course also taught me to identify not only the fraudulenmt activities but most importantly, pattern recognition amongst a large data set to identify bad actors and create exception logic to catch the fraudulent activities. The second assignment “Digital Forensic Analysis” focused on the usage of stenography and leveraging python to decrypt messages within images. This was one of the most interesting assignments I have never done and was probably the most fun. 
I believe I am still weak in my python coding and will continue to take additional DataCamp and bootcamp courses after this degree to further develop my inadequacies as it pertains to Python. I will also be taking additional Networking and Security coursework with the Amazon Web Services teams because my organization has a partnership with Amazon. 

My future considerations for Networking and Cyber Security will revolve around additional python coding, networking and cyber security courses through AWS and attending other coursework and certifications around Artificial Intelligence and Cyber Security.

## **Sample of Works**
My sample of works can be found in the following repositories:

[CIDM-6340 - Ransomware Recovery Plan](https://github.com/MMD2731/CIDM-6395-70-CAPSTONE/blob/main/Samples%20of%20Work/RansomwareRecovery_MiguelSanchez.docx)

[CIDM-6356 - Digital Forensic Analysis](https://github.com/MMD2731/CIDM-6395-70-CAPSTONE/blob/main/Samples%20of%20Work/Digital%20Forensic%20Analysis.docx)

[CIDM-6356 - Detecting Employee Fraud](https://github.com/MMD2731/CIDM-6395-70-CAPSTONE/blob/main/Samples%20of%20Work/Detecting%20Employee%20Fraud__FINALSUB.docx)