# **Business Analytics** 

Prior to my experience in CIDM-6308 “Seminar in Data Analytics” my knowledge was in between that of a Novice/Intermediate level (Leaning more towards the Novice end of the spectrum).  While I did use some SQL query statements that were very basic, I was not confident enough to use my knowledge in actual practice. This course did not really facilitate the knowledge in really any capacity. Dr. Chen provided the worst types of exercises and materials. During the first week of our condensed summer course Dr. Chen provided a Class 00 Slide deck that had 16 slides in total, with 9 slides with “Success Tips” from other students who took the course during summer semesters. This professor was essentially providing us with tips / reviews of how “great” of a professor he is. This course was interesting because of the material, but Dr. Chen did not really teach the conceptual reasoning and value to various tools we used, especially Rapid Miner. The assignments were more to the effect of “do this and you’ll get a grade” and not provide the true reasoning why its beneficial. 

When going through the “refresher” SQL course there was no value added whatsoever and it was just busy work, as well as many of his assignments which included DataCamp courses (which should have been enough in reality). This professor did not imbue or make me feel as if he was a resource to assist and facilitate the knowledge of his students. I just felt like he was an assignment provider that made assignments more difficult and time-consuming than they really needed to be. What did inspire me was the material, book and tools that we had to use in the course. I am proud that without Dr. Chen’s help at all I attained an A in this course, and it was purely because of YouTube and self-teaching. His slides were useless, and after week 1, I realized I only needed them to answer his “tricky” questions within his quizzes and exams. You can tell when a professor just wants to “trick” you versus facilitating the objective seeking knowledge, I believe he enjoys when students get an answer wrong. On the other hand, the tools that we used were extremely interesting and I thoroughly enjoyed them, but the learning curve was extremely steep because I had no support nor guidance from my professor. I spent countless hours learning Rapid Miner on my own and scouring online resources and to self-teach myself. Other students believed his videos were “phenomenal” (which they were far from) nor were they are sufficient. I have taken various courses from WTAMU (as this is my second Master’s degree) and have invested heavily in this school with my hard earned resources and time. 

The level of disappointment that this professor gave me as a WTAMU Buff was disheartening. I feel as if I lit a fire on the finances, I used to take this course as well as the time I spent away from my loved ones. The extent of this professor’s videos was reading each slide of material, word for word. Dr. Chen did not provide any context behind RapidMiner, why we chose the specific models we were selecting versus the others and provide the true essence of teaching. I am highly disappointed that I even took this course. As for the tools we used, I was inspired to create my own personal prediction models using RapidMiner for my external interests where predictive “forecasting” would prove to be beneficial. I believe RapidMiner is so beneficial that I have decided to implement this tool within my financial institution. We will begin leveraging the tool to predict rhe churn of customer accounts. The goal will be use it initially for churn and eventually use it for risk prevention and identify volatile spending habits of high-risk accounts. The section of the course that I was most excited about was the data visualization and business intelligence section but again, there was really nothing beneficial of the “clustering” exercises we completed within Tableau. Thankfully, I have experience using Tableau professionally, but I was hoping to augment that knowledge through this course. 

The second course which I was forced to take (due to lack of other courses being available) towards my Business Analytics MSCISBA core coursework was CIDM-6362 “Advanced Business Forecasting”. I am a firm believer that this course should not be titled “Advanced Business Forecasting” but rather “R Studio Forecasting”. While R is a popular open-source language that is used in data science and business analytics this MSCISBA course should offer R as a component of the curriculum within a max of two classes. The MSCISBA curriculum should have had a coding specific course available to go over the ins and outs of coding for Python. Python offers similar functionalities with a vast and continuously growing data science ecosystem. Python has become quite ubiquitous throughout the programming landscape and offers more flexibility and integrations across all other coding languages, it is widely considered as the “coding language of today and tomorrow”. Python is a versatile programming language capable of handling various tasks such as data collection, storage, analysis, visualization, and deployment of machine learning pipelines. It is suitable for both data analysis and creating machine learning models, making it a comprehensive tool for data-related tasks. In contrast, R is primarily focused on statistics and data analysis, offering advanced graphing capabilities through libraries like ggPlot2, which follows the Grammar of Graphics approach. This provides users with extensive customization options for visualizing data, a feature that Python lacks to some extent. While R may be the preferred choice for data analysts due to its robust statistical capabilities and superior graphing options, Python is often favored by data scientists for its versatility and broader range of applications. Ultimately, the choice between Python and R depends on whether one prioritizes generalization (Python) or specialization (R) in their data-related work. 

R is extremely specialized and therefore leaves the potential for graduates with this MSCISBA to be deficient in languages that helps understand the overall landscape of software development, coding and business analytics. This decision should be left to the choice of the student but advising that the course itself is focused soled on R or Python. Allow the student to come to that decision versus forcing them to take a course called “Advanced Business Forecasting” which solely focuses on just R. The title of this course is extremely misleading and should be amended. The other option would be to provide an overview of both languages within the Advanced Business Forecasting course. For example, CIDM-6303 (an extremely intense course) provided an overview of nearly all Technical Foundations in CIS. CIDM-6362 should be a Foundations course in Advanced Business Forecasting showing all the tools/languages available (or focus on at least 2 of them) while not concentrating on the niche that is R. The other argument would be teaching R with a wide-range of domains beyond finance such as; Technology and IT for cybersecurity analytics, performance monitoring, anomaly detection and even Healthcare and Pharmaceuticals, to name a few other domains. The course I took was solely focused on economic data and this was probably due to the fact that the professor that taught the course was the most comfortable with this specific field. 

The Forecasting project I worked on for CIDM-6362 provided me with a baseline to analyze the economic data comparing Amarillo, Texas to Sacramento, California. The main industries of these two cities we focused on was the Cattle selling, Housing Market and Unemployment rate statistics of Amarillo in contrast to Sacramento’s Grape Sales, Housing Market and Unemployment rates, respectively. The goal was to find the commonalities between the two and be able to articulate to an audience the time series regression charts, residuals, and identify the most accurate predictive forecasts (by leveraging the appropriate models). This project helped me identify the appropriate time series forecasting models to choose from when looking at economic data. This course should be included in the MS in Finance and be an elective within the MSCISBA curriculum. 

My deficiencies in Advanced Business Forecasting are vast because of this course and I will have to really focus on identifying other bootcamps or certifications I can attain to leverage languages like Python and Julia. Julia is the next-generation dynamic programming language which can be used in industries such as Healthcare and IT. The goal is to prepare for the future of Computer Information Systems and therefore generalization is great but focusing on the future will better prepare students like myself for the future. 



## **Sample of Works**
My sample of works can be found in the following repositories:


[CIDM-6308 - RapidMiner Predictive Analysis and Data Science Certificate](https://github.com/MMD2731/CIDM-6395-70-CAPSTONE/blob/main/Samples%20of%20Work/RapidMiner_Certificate.docx)

[CIDM-6362 - Forecasting Project 1 for Amarillo & Sacramento](https://github.com/MMD2731/CIDM-6395-70-CAPSTONE/blob/main/Samples%20of%20Work/Forecasting%20Project%201_MM.pdf)

[CIDM-6362 - Forecasting Project 2 for Amarillo & Sacramento](https://github.com/MMD2731/CIDM-6395-70-CAPSTONE/blob/main/Samples%20of%20Work/Forecasting%20Project%202%20MM.pdf)
