# **Software Engineering and Development**


During my MSCISBA journey the first course that I took which dived directly into Technical foundations was CIDM-6303 "Technical Foundations in CIS". The foundational topics covered structured and procedural programming, database management, and software/web development. We explored procedural programming, object-oriented programming, data access, HTML/CSS, structured query language (SQL), data normalization, entity relational diagrams, and object modeling. The order in which I took my Data Management courses was prior to CIDM-6303 course but due to availability I had to take this class after my Seminar in Data Analytics class. The course objectives of CIDM-6303 include developing web applications using HTML, CSS, and modern developmental frameworks, demonstrating fundamentals of coding, managing relational databases using SQL, exploring how businesses use data science, validating the use of a distributed version control system, considering ethical aspects of data science and software engineering, and exploring foundational topics in networking and IT. 

This course was one of the most interesting and intense courses I have ever taken in the MSCISBA program. Working through the DataCamp portion of Data Science for business leaders and reviewing SQL during the initial two weeks was the easiest portion of the course. The most difficult was the Web Development portion of the course where we had to create HTML and CSS coding through a website exercise. This was my first ever exposure to Web Development and it was very interesting but also difficult due to the lack of initial exposure to the subject. The remainder of the course focused on Python through the remaining 9 weeks of the course. The Python portion of CIDM-6303 dealt with copying code line by line and testing the functions as you go through the assignments. While this was one form of learning the material, I did not fully grasp the coding assignment because the initial material for Web Development was extremely time consuming and difficult. 

This course should have focused on Python coding with a slight dabble in the implementation of Web Development within the Python. The sections where additional context and multiple week overviews would have been beneficial was weeks 11-13 which focused on Popular Python Packages, using Django to build web applications and Machine learning. Most of the course material in this course was through an online portal where I was not able to save my work to review in the future. The assignments that I was able to save and learn from during this course was Networking Notes where we covered a slew of various networking functionalities. Additionally, Ethics in technology notes which focused on the ethical implications especially regarding disinformation and global AI ethics. 

During CIDM-6330 "Software Engineering and Systems" we focused on understanding the Internet and World Wide Web as communication mediums and standards for moving information between client hardware and software. Dr.Babb was instrumental sharing his knowledge of Object-Oriented Programing (OOP), Software Design Principles such as modularity, loose coupling and single responsibility principle. Dr.Babb focused the first two weeks of our course by working on an assignment revolving around Test Driven Development, “Roman Numerals Kata”. During this assignment we worked on creating code by various iterations and refactoring while building the code. 

Our final project leveraged all the aspects of Software Engineering Fundamentals and was another illuminating but extremely frustrating experience.  The course delves into the basic hardware and software architectures underlying the Internet and Web. We reviewed markup languages for presenting information and programming languages for directing the flow and modification of web information. Our Assignments and final project entailed developing business and value plans for web applications, mastering content management tools, understanding modular extensibility, and learning deployment through version control software (using Visual Studio Code) and leveraging Github. During our course we reviewed Database implementation via models in python, Networking and Security best practices, scalability options and the usage of Agile within the Software Development Life-Cycle. Overall, Dr.Babb equipped us with the knowledge and skills necessary to navigate and utilize the Internet and Web effectively, along with course materials to identify the best practices to meet the needs of our own individual project. 

I realized I have very strong overall software design, database management, business analytics and use case creations (via requirement gathering, functionality testing) and solid project management skills. When it came to coding creation and making a python application from scratch, I struggled heavily. My weaknesses from this segment on the MSCISBA curriculum (under Software Design and Development) is the lack of Django knowledge and python development. My plan is to continue to take additional coding bootcamps focusing on Python and software development to further my knowledge and broaden my horizons. 
